<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
			<p>When the boat entered the harbor it was already night. Tristrem was tired, but his fatigue was pleasant to him. His Odyssey was done. New York, it is true, was many days away, but he was no longer to wander feverishly from town to town. If he was weary, at least his mind was at rest. Riva is on the Austrian frontier, and while the luggage was being examined Tristrem hummed contentedly to himself. He would get some dinner at the hotel, for he was hungry as he had not been in months. At last he would have a good night’s rest; there would be no insomnia now. In the magic of a cablegram that succube had been exorcised forever. On the morrow he would start afresh, and neither stop nor stay till the goal was reached. It was no longer vague and intangible⁠—it was full in sight. And so, while the officers were busy with his traps, he hummed the unforgotten air, <i xml:lang="fr">O Magali, ma bien aimée</i>.</p>
			<p>The hotel to which he presently had himself conveyed stands in a large garden that leans to the lake. It is a roomy structure, built quadrangularwise. On one side is a little châlet. Above, to the right and left, precipitous cliffs and trellised mountains loom like battlements of Titan homes. The air is very sweet, and at that season of the year almost overweighted with the scent of flowers. In spite of the night, the sky was visibly blue, and high up in the heavens the moon glittered with the glint of sulphur.</p>
			<p>As the carriage drew up at the door there was a clang of bells; an individual in a costume that was brilliant as the uniform of a field-officer hastened to greet the guest; at the threshold was the Oberkellner; a few steps behind him the manager stood bowing persuasively; and as Tristrem entered, the waiters, hastily marshalled, ranged themselves on either side of the hall.</p>
			<p>“Vorrei,” Tristrem began, and then remembering that he was no longer in Italy, continued in German.</p>
			<p>The answer came in the promptest English.</p>
			<p>“Yes, my lord; will your lordship dine at table d’hôte? <i xml:lang="de">Du, Konrad, schnell, die Speise-karte.</i>”</p>
			<p>Tristrem examined the bill of fare which was then brought him, and while he studied the contents he heard himself called by name. He looked up, and recognized Ledyard Yorke, his companion of months before on the outward-bound Cunarder, who welcomed him with much warmth and cordiality.</p>
			<p>“And whatever became of Miss Tippity-fitchet? You don’t mean to say you did not see her again? Fancy that! It was through no fault of hers, then. But there, in spite of your promise, you didn’t so much as look <em>me</em> up. I am just in from a tramp to Mori; suppose we brush up a bit and have dinner together?” He turned to the waiter. “Konrad, wir speisen draussen; verschaffen Sie ’was Monkenkloster.”</p>
			<p>“Zu Befehl, Herr Baron.”</p>
			<p>Half an hour later, when the brushing up was done and the Monkenkloster was uncorked, Tristrem and Yorke seated themselves in an arbor that overhung the lake.</p>
			<p>“It’s ever so much better here than at table d’hôte,” Yorke began. “I hate that sort of business⁠—don’t you? I have been here over two months, but after a week or so of it I gave up promiscuous feeding. Since then, whenever I have been able, I have dined out here. I don’t care to have every dish I eat seasoned with the twaddle of cheap-trippers. To be sure, few of them get here. Riva is well out of the beaten track. But one table d’hôte is just like another, and they are all of them wearying to the spirit and fatiguing to digestion. Look at that water, will you. It’s almost Venice, isn’t it? I can tell you, I have done some good work in this place. But what have you been doing yourself?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing to speak of,” Tristrem answered. “I have been roaming from pillar to post. It’s the second time I have been over the Continent, and now I am on my way home. I am tired of it; I shall be glad to be back.”</p>
			<p>“Yes you were the last person I expected to meet. If I remember rightly, you said on the steamer that you were to be on this side but a short time. It’s always the unexpected that occurs, isn’t it? By the way, I have got my sphinx.”</p>
			<p>“What sphinx?”</p>
			<p>“I thought I told you. I have been looking for years for a certain face. I wanted one that I could give to a sphinx. The accessories were nothing. I put them on canvas long ago, but the face I never could grasp. Not one of all that I tried suited me. I had almost given it up; but I got it⁠—I got it at last. I’ll show it to you tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>“I am afraid⁠—⁠You see, I leave very early.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll show it to you tonight, then; you must see it. If I had had it made to order it could not suit me better. It came about in such an odd way. All winter I have been at work in Munich. I intended to remain until June, but the spring there is bleaker than your own New England. One morning I said to myself, Why not take a run down to Italy? Two days later, I was on my way. But at Mori, instead of pushing straight on to Verona, I drove over here, thinking it would be pleasanter to take the boat. I arrived here at midnight. The next morning I looked out of the window, and there, right in front of me, in that châlet, was my sphinx. Well, the upshot of it was, I have been here ever since. I repainted the entire picture⁠—the old one wasn’t good enough.”</p>
			<p>“I should like to see it very much,” said Tristrem, less from interest than civility.</p>
			<p>“I wish you had come in time to see the original. She never suspected that she had posed as a model, and though her window was just opposite mine, I believe she did not so much as pay me the compliment of being aware of my existence. There were days when she sat hour after hour looking out at the lake, almost motionless, in the very attitude that I wanted. It was just as though she were repeating the phrase that Flaubert puts in the Sphinx’s mouth, ‘I am guarding my secret⁠—I calculate and I dream.’ Wasn’t it odd, after all, that I should have found her in that haphazard way?”</p>
			<p>“It was odd,” Tristrem answered; “who was she?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know. French, I fancy. Her name was Dupont, or Duflot⁠—something utterly bourgeois. There was an old lady with her, her mother, I suppose. I remember, at table d’hôte one evening, a Russian woman, with an ‘itch’ in her name, said she did not think she was comme il faut. ‘She is <i xml:lang="fr">comme il m’en faut</i>,’ I answered, and mentally I added, ‘which is a deuced sight more than I can say of you, who are comme il n’en faut pas.’ The Russian woman was indignant at her, I presume, because she did not come to the public table. You know that feeling, ‘If it’s good enough for me, it’s good enough for you.’ But my sphinx not only did not appear at table d’hôte, she did not put her foot outside of the châlet. One bright morning she disappeared from the window, and a few days later I heard that she had been confined. Shortly after she went away. It did not matter, though, I had her face. Let me give you another glass of Monkenkloster.”</p>
			<p>“She was married, then?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, her husband was probably some brute that did not know how to appreciate her. I don’t mean, though, that she looked unhappy. She looked impassible, she looked exactly the way I wanted to have her look. If you have finished your coffee, come up to my little atelier. I wish you could see the picture by daylight, but you may be able to get an idea of it from the candles.” And as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Yorke led the way, he added, confidentially, “I should really like to have your opinion.”</p>
			<p>The atelier to which Yorke had alluded as “little” was, so well as Tristrem could discern in the darkness, rather spacious than otherwise. He loitered in the doorway until his companion had lighted and arranged the candles, and then, under his guidance, went forward to admire. The picture, which stood on an easel, was really excellent; so good, in fact, that Tristrem no sooner saw the face of the sphinx than to his ears came the hum of insects, the murmur of distant waters. It was Viola Raritan to the life.</p>
			<p>“She guarded her secret, indeed,” he muttered, huskily. And when Yorke, surprised at such a criticism, turned to him for an explanation, he had just time to break his fall. Tristrem had fallen like a log.</p>
			<p>As he groped back through a roar and turmoil to consciousness again, he thought that he was dead and that this was the tomb. “That Monkenkloster must have been too much for him,” he heard Yorke say, in German, and then some answer came to him in sympathetic gutturals. He opened his eyes ever so little, and then let the lids close down. Had he been in a nightmare, he wondered, or was it Viola? “He’s coming too,” he heard Yorke say. “Yes, I am quite right now,” he answered, and he raised himself on his elbow. “I think,” he continued, “that I had better get to my room.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense. You must lie still awhile.”</p>
			<p>For the moment Tristrem was too weak to rebel, and he fell back again on the lounge on which he had been placed, and from which he had half arisen. Was it a dream, or was it the real? “There, I am better now,” he said at last; “I wonder, I⁠⸺⁠Would you mind ordering me a glass of brandy?”</p>
			<p>“Why, there’s a carafon of it here. I thought you had had too much of that wine.”</p>
			<p>Some drink was then brought him, which he swallowed at a gulp. Under its influence his strength returned.</p>
			<p>“I am sorry to have put you to so much trouble,” he said collectedly to Yorke and to a waiter who had been summoned to his assistance; “I am quite myself now.” He stood up again and the waiter, seeing that he was fully restored, withdrew. When the door closed behind him, Tristrem went boldly back to the picture.</p>
			<p>It was as Yorke had described it. In the background was a sunset made of cymbal strokes of vermilion, splattered with gold, and seamed with fantasies of red. In the foreground fluttered a chimera, so artfully done that one almost heard the whir of its wings. And beneath it crouched the Sphinx. From the eyrie of the years the ages had passed unmarked, unnoticed. The sphinx brooded, motionless and dumb.</p>
			<p>With patient, scrutinizing attention Tristrem looked in her eyes and at her face. There was no mistake, it was Viola. Was there ever another girl in the world such as she? And this was her secret! Or was there a secret, after all, and might he not have misunderstood?</p>
			<p>“Tell me,” he said⁠—“I will not praise your picture; in many respects it is above praise⁠—but tell me, is what you said true?”</p>
			<p>“Is what true?”</p>
			<p>“What you said of the model.”</p>
			<p>“About her being in the châlet? Of course it is. Why do you ask?”</p>
			<p>“No, not that, tell me⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Yorke, I do not mean to be tragic; if I seem so, forgive me and overlook it. But as you love honor, tell me, is it true that she had a child in this place?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, so I heard.”</p>
			<p>“And you say her name was⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Madame Dubois⁠—Dupont⁠—I have forgotten; they can tell you at the bureau. But it seems to me⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” Tristrem answered. “Thank you,” he repeated. He hesitated a second and then, with an abrupt good night, he hurried from the atelier and down the corridor till he reached his room.</p>
			<p>Through the open window, the sulphur moon poured in. He looked out in the garden. Beyond, half concealed in the shadows, he could see the outline of the châlet. And it was there she had hid! He pressed his hands to his forehead; he could not understand. For the moment he felt that if he could lose his reason it would be a grateful release. If only some light would come! He drew a handkerchief from his pocket and mopped his face. And then suddenly, as he did so, he caught a spark of that for which he groped. The room turned round, and he sank into a chair.</p>
			<p>Yes, he remembered, it was at Bergamo, no, at Bologna. Yes, it was at Bergamo, he remembered perfectly well. He had taken from one of his trunks a coat that he had not worn since he went into mourning. It had been warm that day, and he wanted some thinner clothing. He remembered at the time congratulating himself that he had had the forethought to bring it. And later in the day he had taken from the pocket a handkerchief of a smaller size than that which he habitually used. He had looked at it, and in the corner he had found the Weldon crest. As to how it had come in his possession, he had at the time given no thought. Weldon, in one of his visits, might have left it at Waverley Place, or he himself might have borrowed it when dining at Weldon’s house. He was absentminded, he knew, and apt to be forgetful, and so at the time he had given the matter no further thought. After all, what incident could be more trivial? But now the handkerchief, like a magician’s rug, carried him back to Narragansett. As well as he could remember, the last occasion on which he wore that coat was the day on which the butler’s telegram had summoned him to town. Then, on learning of his father’s death, he had put on other things, of sombrer hue. Harris, without rummaging in the pockets, had folded the coat and put it away. And it had remained folded ever since till the other day at Bologna⁠—no, at Bergamo.</p>
			<p>That morning at Narragansett, when he was hurrying into the cottage, the man who had aided Viola home the preceding evening drove up with her hat, with this very handkerchief, and the story of a dream. Aye, and his own dream. So this was Truth. She had pursued him, indeed. He could feel her knees on his arms, her fetid breath in his face. But this time it was not a nightmare. It was the real.</p>
			<p>Yes, it was that. One by one he recalled the incidents of the past⁠—incidents on which his mind loathed to dwell, rebelling against its own testimony until he coerced the shuddering memories to his will. There were the numberless times in which he had encountered Weldon coming in or leaving her house, almost haunting it with his presence. There was that wanton lie, and the unexplained and interrupted scene between them. It was then, perhaps, that he had first shown the demon that was in him. And then, afterward, was that meeting on the cars⁠—he with a bruise on his cheek and a gash on his neck. Why was Viola’s whip broken, if it were not that she had broken it on his face? Why did the nails of her ungloved hand look as though they had been stained with the juice of berries? Why, indeed, if it were not that she had sunk them in his flesh. Why had he heard her calling “Coward” to the night? It was for this, then, that the engagement had been broken; it was for this that she had hidden herself abroad.</p>
			<p>For the first time since his boyhood, he threw himself on the bed and sobbed aloud. To stifle his grief he buried his face in the pillow, and bit it with his teeth. It was more than grief, it was anguish, and it refused to be choked. But presently it did leave him. It left him quivering from head to foot, and in its place came another visitor. An obsession, from which he shrank, surged suddenly, and claimed him for its own. In a combat, of which his heart was the one dumb witness, he battled with it. He struggled with it in a conflict that outlasted hours; but presumably he coped in vain. The next morning his face was set as a captive’s. In a fortnight he was in New York.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
