<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
			<p>At dawn he awoke refreshed. The sun rose from the ocean like an indolent girl from a bath. Before the house was astir he was out of doors exploring the land. He strolled past the row of hotels that front the sea, and pausing a moment at the Casino, fragrant then, and free of the stench of drink that is the outcome of the later season, he wondered how it was that, given money, and possibly brains, it was necessary to make a building as awkward as was that. And then he strayed to the shore, past the tenantless bathhouses, and on through the glories of the morning to the untrodden beach beyond.</p>
			<p>As he walked, the village faded in the haze. The tide was low and the sand firm and hard. The waves broke leisurely in films and fringes of white, gurgling an invitation to their roomy embrace. And when the hotels were lost in the distance and the solitude was murmurous with nature alone, Tristrem, captivated by the allurements of the sea, went down into the waves and clasped them to him as lovers clasp those they love.</p>
			<p>The sun was well on its amble to the zenith before he returned to the cottage. His hostess, he found, had not yet appeared, and as breakfast seemed to be served in that pleasant fashion which necessitates nothing, not even an appetite, Tristrem drank his coffee in solitude. And as he idled over the meal he recalled the horrors of the night, and smiled. The air of the morning, the long and quiet stroll, the plunge in the sea, and the after-bath of sunlight that he had taken stretched full length on the sand, had dissipated the enervating emotions of dream and brought him in their stead a new invigoration. He was about to begin the dithyrambs of the day before, when the servant appeared, bearing a yellow envelope, and a book in which he was to put his name. He gave the receipt and opened the message, wonderingly.</p>
			<p>“<i>Please come to town</i>,” it ran, “<i>your father is dying.⁠—Robert Harris.</i>”</p>
			<p>“Your father is dying,” he repeated. “H’m. Robert Harris. I never knew before what the butler’s first name was. But what has that to do with it? There are times when I am utterly imbecile. Your father is dying. Yes, of course, I must go at once. But it isn’t possible. H’m. I remember. He looked ghastly when I saw him. I suppose⁠—I ought to⁠—good God, why should I attempt to feign a sorrow that I do not feel? It is his own fault. I would have⁠—But there, what is the use?”</p>
			<p>He bit his nail; he was perplexed at his absence of sensibility. “And yet,” he mused, “in his way he has been kind to me. He has been kind; that is, if it be kindness in a father to let a son absolutely alone. After all, filial affection must be like patriotism, ingrained as an obligation, a thing to blush at if not possessed. Yet then, again, if a country acts like a stepmother to its children, if a father treats a son as a guardian might treat a ward, the ties are conventional; and on what shall affection subsist? It was he who called me into being, and, having done so, he assumed duties which he should not have shirked. It was not for him to make himself a stranger to me; it was for him to teach me to honor him so much, to love him so well that at his death my head would be bowed in prostrations of grief. I used to try to school myself to think that it was only his way; that, outwardly cold and undemonstrative, his heart was warm as another’s. But⁠—well, it may have been, it may have been. After all, if I can’t grieve, I would cross the continent to spare him a moment’s pain. It was he, I suppose, who told Harris to wire. Yes, I must hurry.”</p>
			<p>He called the servant to him. “Can you tell me, please, when the next train goes?” But the servant had no knowledge whereon to base a reply. She suggested, however, that information might be obtained at an inn which stood a short distance up the road. He scribbled a few lines on a card, and gave it to the woman. “Take that to Miss Raritan, please, will you?” he said, and left the house.</p>
			<p>At the inn a very large individual sat on the stoop, coatless, a straw covering of a remoter summer far back on his head, and his feet turned in. He listened to Tristrem with surly indifference, and spat profusely. He didn’t know; he reckoned the morning train had gone.</p>
			<p>“Hay, Alf,” he called out to the negro who had taken Tristrem from the station the night before, and who was then driving by, “when’s the next train go?”</p>
			<p>“ ’Bout ten minutes; I just took a party from Taylor’s.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” said Tristrem to the innkeeper, who spat again by way of acknowledgment. “Can you take me to the station?” he asked the negro; and on receiving an affirmative reply, he told him to stop at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Raritan’s for his traps.</p>
			<p>As Tristrem entered the gate he saw Viola’s assistant of the preceding evening drive up, waving a hat.</p>
			<p>“I got it,” the man cried out, “here it is. First time it ever passed a night out of doors, I’ll bet. And none the worse for it, either.” He handed it over to Tristrem. “I dreamt about you last night,” he added.</p>
			<p>“That’s odd,” Tristrem answered, “I dreamed about you.” The man laughed at this as had he never heard anything so droll. “Well, I swan!” he exclaimed, and cracked his whip with delight. His horse started. “Here,” he said, “I near forgot. Whoa, there, can’t you. This goes with the hat.” And he crumpled a handkerchief in his hand, and tossing it to Tristrem, he let the horse continue his way unchecked.</p>
			<p>The hat which the man had found did not indeed look as though it had passed a night on the roadside. Save for an incidental speck or two it might have come fresh from a bandbox. Tristrem carried it into the cottage, and was placing it on the hall-table when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Raritan appeared.</p>
			<p>“I am so sorry,” she began, “Viola has told me⁠—”</p>
			<p>“How is she? May I not see her?”</p>
			<p>“She scarcely slept last night.”</p>
			<p>Tristrem looked in the lady’s face. The lids of her eyes were red and swollen.</p>
			<p>“But may I not see her? May I not, merely for a moment.”</p>
			<p>“She is sleeping now,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Raritan answered; “perhaps,” she added, “it is better that you should not. The doctor has been here. He says that she should be quiet. But you will come back, will you not? Truly I sympathize with you.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Raritan’s eyes filled with tears, but to what they were due, who shall say? She seemed to Tristrem unaccountably nervous and distressed.</p>
			<p>“There is nothing serious the matter, is there?” he asked, anxiously. And at the question, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Raritan almost choked. She shook her head, however, but Tristrem was not assured. “I <em>must</em> see her,” he said, and he made as would he mount the stair.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Varick! she is asleep. She has had a wretched night. When you are able to come back, it will be different. But if you care for her, let her be.”</p>
			<p>The protest was almost incoherent. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Raritan appeared beside herself with anxiety.</p>
			<p>“Forgive me,” said Tristrem, “I did not mean to vex you. Nor would I disturb her.” He paused a second, dumbly and vaguely afflicted. “You will tell her, will you not?” he added; “tell her this, that I wanted to see her. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Raritan, my whole life is wrapped up in her.” He hesitated again. “You are tired too, I can see. You were up with her last night, were you not?”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Raritan bowed her head.</p>
			<p>“You must forgive me,” he repeated, “I did not understand. Tell me,” he continued, “last night I awoke thinking that I heard her calling. Did she call?”</p>
			<p>“Call what?”</p>
			<p>“I thought⁠—you see I was half, perhaps wholly asleep, but I thought I heard her voice. I was mistaken, was I not?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, you must have been.”</p>
			<p>The negro had brought down the luggage, and stood waiting at the gate.</p>
			<p>“You will tell her⁠—<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Raritan⁠—I love her with all my heart and soul.”</p>
			<p>The lady’s lips quivered. “She knows it, and so do I.”</p>
			<p>“You will ask her to write.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I will do so.”</p>
			<p>Tristrem took her hand in his. “Tell her from me,” he began, but words failed him, it was his face that completed the message. In a moment more he was in the coach on his way to the station.</p>
			<p>There was a brisk drive along the sea, a curve was rounded, and the station stood in sight. And just as the turn was made Tristrem caught the shriek of a whistle.</p>
			<p>“There she goes,” the negro exclaimed, “you ought to have been spryer.”</p>
			<p>“Has the train gone?” Tristrem asked.</p>
			<p>“Can’t you see her? I knew you’d be late.” The man was insolent in his familiarity, but Tristrem did not seem to notice it.</p>
			<p>“I would have given much not to be,” he said.</p>
			<p>At this the negro became a trifle less uncivil. “Would you ree-ly like to catch that train?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“I would indeed.”</p>
			<p>“Is it worth twenty-five dollars to you?”</p>
			<p>Tristrem nodded.</p>
			<p>“Well, boss, I tell you. That train stops at Peacedale, and at Wakefield she shunts off till the mail passes. Like as not the express is late. If I get you to Kingston before the Newport passes, will you give me twenty-five?”</p>
			<p>“If I make the connection I will give you fifty.”</p>
			<p>“That’s talking. You’ll get there, boss. Just lay back and count your thumbs.”</p>
			<p>The negro snapped his whip, and soon Tristrem was jolted over one of the worst and fairest roads of New England, through a country for which nature has done her best, and where only the legislator is vile. One hamlet after another was passed, and still the coach rolled on.</p>
			<p>“We’ll get there,” the negro repeated from time to time, and to encourage his fare he lashed the horses to their utmost speed. Peacedale was in the distance; Wakefield was passed, and in a cloud of dust they tore through Kingston and reached the station just as the express steamed up.</p>
			<p>“I told you I’d do it,” the negro exclaimed, exultingly. “I’ll get checks for your trunks.”</p>
			<p>A minute or two more, and the checks were obtained; the negro was counting a roll of bills, and in a drawing room car Tristrem was being whirled to New York.</p>
			<p>For several hours he sat looking out at the retreating uplands, villages, and valleys. But after a while he remembered the scantiness of his breakfast, and, summoning the porter, he obtained from him some food and drink. By this time the train had reached New Haven, and there Tristrem alighted to smoke a cigarette. He was, however, unable to finish it before the whistle warned him that he should be aboard again. The porter, who had been gratified by a tip, then told him that there was a smoking compartment in the car beyond the one in which he had sat, and, as the train moved on, Tristrem went forward in the direction indicated.</p>
			<p>The compartment was small, with seats for two on one side, and for three, or for four at most, on the other. As Tristrem entered it he saw that the larger sofa was occupied by one man, who lay out on it, full length, his face turned to the partition. Tristrem took a seat opposite him, and lit a fresh cigarette. As he smoked he looked at the reclining form of his vis-à-vis. About the man’s neck a silk handkerchief had been rolled, but one end had come undone and hung loosely on the cushion, and as Tristrem looked he noticed that on the neck was a wound, unhealed and fresh, a line of excoriation, that neither steel nor shot could have caused, but which might have come from a scratch. But, after all, what business was it of his? And he turned his attention again to the retreating uplands and to the villages that starred the route.</p>
			<p>When the cigarette was done, he stood up to leave the compartment. But however quietly he had moved, he seemed to arouse his neighbor, who turned heavily, as though to change his position. As he did so, Tristrem saw that it was Royal Weldon, and that on his face was a bruise. He would have spoken, for Weldon was looking at him, but he recalled the wanton lie of the week before, and as he hesitated whether to speak or pass on, Weldon half rose. “Damn you,” he said, “you are everywhere.” Then he lay down, turning his face again to the wall, and Tristrem, without a word, went to the other car and found his former seat.</p>
			<p>Two hours later he reached his home. He let himself in with a latchkey, and rang the bell. But when Harris appeared he knew at once, by the expression which the butler assumed, that he had come too late.</p>
			<p>“When did it happen?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“It was last evening, sir; he came in from his drive and inquired for you, sir. I said that you had gone out of town, and showed him the address you left. When I went to hannounce dinner, sir, he was sitting in his armchair with his hat on. I thought he was asleep. I sent for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> McMasters, sir, but it was no use. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> McMasters said it was the ’art, sir.”</p>
			<p>“You have notified my grandfather, have you not?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir, I did, sir; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Van Norden came in this morning, and left word as how he would like to see you when you got back, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Very good. Call Davis, and get my things from the cabman.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir; thank you, sir. I beg pardon, sir,” he added, “would you wish some dinner? There’s a nice fillet and a savory.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
